Inheritance is a pretty
important concept
when it comes to
object-oriented programming.
It may help you to write code
that is easier to understand,
and easier to maintain.
So here we will consider an
example of multiple quadrature
methods, which we
implement using inheritance
from a base class.
We have an application
that we want
to use to compute the
quadrature of a given function.
And, on the command line,
we can specify the method
we wish to use, just as string.
So if the method is gauss5,
we'll use a Gaussian method
with 5 points, or
with 10 points,
or alternatively, we'll
use a Simpson rule
for the quadrature.
The quadrature is
implemented as a class,
and it is declared
as allocatable,
the quad, the variable.
And depending on the
value of the method,
we'll instantiate an
object of the given type,
using the source argument
of the allocate statement.
So either we get a Gauss
5 quadrature method,
Gauss 10 quadrature
method, or Simpson method.
Once we have our
quadrature object,
we can use its
compute method that
takes as a first
argument a function,
and as the second
and third arguments
the values from
which, to which we
want to compute the quadrature.
The function itself is
fairly straightforward.
It takes a double as an
argument and returns double.
And in this case, it simply
computes the sine of x.
We'll start at the top
level of the hierarchy.
Each quadrature method will
implement a compute procedure
in order to do the
actual quadrature.
So we start with a
user-defined type, quad_t,
and this abstract.
That means it's not going
to be completely defined.
That's going to be left
to user-defined types that
are derived from this type.
You just add a single procedure,
a single time-bound procedure,
which adheres to the
interface compute_t,
and which is called compute.
So that's the name of
our abstract method.
And it has a pass and
a deferred attribute.
So deferred means it's not
going to be defined here.
It will be defined
in the children.
The pass, we'll come
back to in just a second.
So if we look at the abstract
interface, compute_t,
then we see that the first
argument is, in fact, a class
quad_t argument, and that
is passed in automatically.
To indicate that the pass
attribute in the preceding
declaration is used.
And, as you can see,
it's just an intent in,
and by convention,
it's called this.
That will be the object on
which this method is evoked.
Furthermore, it has
two arguments, func,
that is a procedure that
adheres to the func_t interface,
and two real values,
a and b, which
are simply the boundaries
of the quadrature.
And the result
type is also real.
Moreover, there is also the
interface for the function
itself, func_t.
And that just takes a
real as an argument,
and will return a real value.
Any function that
adheres to this
can be used in this
quadrature compute procedure.
This is the implementation of
the Simpson quadrature method.
So there is a user defined
type, quad_simpson_t.
And that extends the
abstract type quad_t.
So it's a specialisation
of quad_t.
It has a procedure, a
concrete procedure, compute,
that aliases
compute_simpson, which
is a procedure, a
function to be precise,
which is defined
within this module.
There's also an
interface quad_simpson_t.
And that refers to another
procedure, create_quad.
It's actually a function that
doesn't do anything much.
The only point is
that it can be called
by the allocate statement
to instantiate an object
of this particular type.
The function compute_simpson
itself is just
an implementation of
Simpson's algorithm.
Now for the family
of Gauss methods, so
we have again an
abstract class, which
extends quad_t in this case.
It's quad_gauss_t, and it has
some elements, two real arrays,
one dimensional,
which are allocatable.
And those will hold the
values of the abscissae
and the weights for this method.
It also has some
type-bound procedures.
The first one is a concrete
procedure, compute, again,
aliased to, in this
case, compute_gauss.
And that can be defined here
in this particular module,
because all information
is already present.
We only need the abscissae
and weights arrays,
and those have been defined.
Then there is an
abstract method.
Note it's deferred.
It is the init_quad method.
And that will be used by the
concrete Gauss quadrature
classes, in order to
initialize the correct values
for the abscissae
and weights arrays.
Lastly, there is a set
abscissae and set weights
method, that will be used
to initialize those values.
There is an interface
init_quad_t, and that is,
of course, the abstract one,
which will be implemented
by the child classes.
So it's just declared here.
Three type-bound procedures
are implemented here.
And those are common to
all the implementations,
the concrete implementations of
the Gaussian quadrature method,
and that is the
compute_gauss method that
will do the actual quadrature,
and the initialization methods
for the abscissae and
weights arrays, set_abscissae
and set_weights.
This is a concrete
implementation
of the Gaussian quadrature.
And it's a five point
Gaussian quadrature,
so the type is
quad_gauss5_t, and it
defines a single concrete
procedure, init_quad, which
is an alias for init_quad5.
So that is implemented
in this module,
and it's just a subroutine
that will initialize
the abscissae and
the weights using
the set_abscissae and
set_weights method, which
were defined in the
abstract parent class.
There is also an
interface, quad_gauss5_t,
and that is used to
initialize a new object.
And the procedure for
that is create_quad,
which is defined here.
And it simply calls
the quad init method,
which is defined in this class.
Finally, the second
implementation
of the quadrature method is a
10 point Gaussian quadrature
method.
And that extends again
the quad_gauss_t.
It's extremely similar
to quad_gauss5_t.
The only difference,
essentially,
is that it will initialize
the abscissae and the weights
within 10 values rather than 5.
To summarise, with three
concrete classes, the two
quadratures, so
quad_gauss5_t, quad_gauss10_t,
and quad_simpson_t,
the Gauss quadratures
are implementations
of an abstract class,
quad_gauss_t, which
is an implementation
of the abstract class, quad_t,
and also the quad_simpson_t
is an implementation of
that abstract class, quad_t.
So we have three
concrete classes
and two abstract classes, which
are not really visible here,
except for the top
level class, quad_t,
which is used to declare
the quad variable, which
can hold any of the
concrete quadrature objects.
So basically this is runtime
polymorphism in the sense
that, at runtime, it is decided
which concrete object is
assigned to the quad variable.
Although inheritance
definitely has
its role in software
development,
it should not be overused.
The problem is that with
deep class hierarchies,
it's very difficult
to change your code,
to adapt it to new requirements.
And also there is a
performance penalty
to pay for runtime polymorphism.
So in many situations,
you might consider
alternatives, such as
duck typing or composition
rather than inheritance.